The age spectrum of human populations is shifting toward the older with larger proportions suffering physical decline. 
Mitochondria influence the pace of aging as the energy they provide for cellular function in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 
declines with age. Mitochondrial density is greatest in photoreceptors, particularly cones that have high energy demands and mediate 
color vision. Hence, the retina ages faster than other organs, with a 70% ATP reduction over life and a significant decline in 
photoreceptor function. Mitochondria have specific light absorbance characteristics influencing their performance. Longer wavelengths 
spanning 650–>1,000 nm improve mitochondrial complex activity, membrane potential, and ATP production. Here, we use 670-nm light to 
improve photoreceptor performance  and  measure  this  psychophysically  in  those  aged  28–72  years.  Rod  and  cone  performance  
declined  significantly  after approximately 40 years of age. 670-nm light had no impact in younger individuals, but in those around 
40 years and older, significant improvements were obtained in color contrast sensitivity for the blue visual axis (tritan) known to 
display mitochondrial vulnerability. The red visual axis (protan) improved but not significantly. Rod thresholds also improved 
significantly in those >40 years. Using specific wavelengths to enhance mitochondrial performance will be significant in moderating 
the aging process in this metabolically demanding tissue.

Human  aging  is  a  major  societal  problem  and  the  retina  ages faster than other organs, partly due to its high metabolic rate (1,2).
Here, 30% of central rods die and cones have reduced function by 70 years of age (3–5). The pace of aging is partly controlled by the 
cells metabolism regulated by its mitochondria that produce adeno-sine  triphosphate  (ATP)  to  fuel  cell  function.  When  
mitochondria decline, they have reduced membrane potential and ATP synthesis. When this occurs, mitochondria can increase production of 
reactive oxygen species that increases systemic inflammation and can signal cell death (6).

improvements  in  mitochondrial  function  are  associated  with  an increase  in  mitochondrial  membrane  potential  and  ATP  
produc-tion  (8,9).  Further,  long-wavelength  light  can  improve  retinal  and general  central  nervous  system  function  that  has  
declined  due  to age  or  mitochondrial  insult  (10–12).  It  has  also  been  shown  that photobiomodulation can improve aged murine 
retinal function (13). However,  the  mouse  retina  lacks  a  peak  in  cone  density  centrally and ages very differently from primates 
(14). Further, rodents com-monly  avoid  light  and  do  not  use  vision  as  their  primary  sensory modality.

Twenty-four  healthy  participants  of  both  sexes  were  used  with University College London ethical approval. They ranged from 28 to 
72 years. The cutoff point between younger and older groups was >38 years, with age as the only significant variable. Different 
participants were used to measure rod (scotopic) thresholds and color  contrast  sensitivity  (CCS),  which  were  undertaken  at  
dif-ferent times. There were 12 individuals in each group. In the CCS group there were six younger (five female and one male) and 
six older  (four  female  and  two  male)  participants,  and  in  the  sco-topic  threshold  group  there  were  six  younger  (four  
females  and two  males)  and  six  older  (four  female  and  two  males)  partici-pants.  670-nm  light  devices  were  based  on  
simple  commercial DC  torches  with  ten  670-nm  LEDs  mounted  behind  a  light  dif-fuser  embedded  in  a  tube  that  was  4  
cm  in  diameter.  Energies at  the  cornea  were  approximately  40  mW/cm2  which  often  re-sulted  in  a  mild  green  after  
image  for  approximately  5–10  sec-onds. Participants were asked to use the light to illuminate their dominant eye every morning for 
3 minutes and to repeat this daily for 2 weeks. These metrics were selected because they fell within the range used in a large number of 
animal experiments. 670-nm illumination was largely confined to the central retina comprising the peaks in rod and cone density.